Data has transformed the way that we approach societal problems. The use of data can allow us to further make advances in understanding complex systems because it does not require every detail in a model to be specified, while experiments do. This can result in more progress toward better understanding mechanisms and give us a perspective on the world that we have not been able to develop before. While the data from measurements cannot be used alone, it can provide a solid foundation to build off of for many theories. 

In the first reading we looked at this semester, we were first introduced to the various applications data can have. This initially showed the large scope data science and measurements can have as an interdisciplinary field. Data has made significant progress in describing human development processes, as more people begin to own cell phones. Digital signatures can be used to recognize people who have been affected by disease and other natural disasters. Additionally, data can be used to identify specific areas of poverty by using satellite imagery. Data may also be used to identify differences between the economies of different areas. This would help us better understand why countries develop differently and recognize how to help people in developing countries. I believe that data can also play a major role in medicine in the future. Current experimental trials towards diseases are difficult to carry out due to ethical concerns, but using numbers to address public health issues may prove to be an effective solution. 

Despite data being a very significant advance, it is important to address the disadvantage and use measurements along with other traditional methods we have used in the past. Data science has huge potential to improve human conditions, but it is important to not just look at numbers and data, but also understand the context behind the wicked problems we aim to solve. For example, data scientists need to understand the situations that are actually going on in underdeveloped countries and simply using numbers may depersonalize the process. However, humanizing the individuals is a critical aspect in developing solutions. Additionally, some bias may exist with gathering data, so it is important to use other methods to get a more complete picture. Underprivileged individuals may be underrepresented which can affect how solutions are developed. It is important to consider these disadvantages as they may pose an obstacle in improving humanity’s freedoms. Overall, data science  proves to be a great tool to understand human development and further advance society.
